feat(config): remove the `ignore` and `include` field (#5158)
biomejs/biome: .changeset/introduce_includes.md

---
"@biomejs/biome": major
---

Replace `include` and `ignore` with `includes`.

The Biome configuration file allows users to specify which files should be processed using [glob patterns](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Glob_(programming)).
Prior to Biome 2.0, this was done using the `include` and `ignore` fields.
In Biome 2.0, `include` and `ignore` are removed and replaced by `includes`.
You can run `biome migrate` to convert `include` and `ignore` into `includes` automatically.

`includes` uses a different glob pattern format that fixes [many](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/2421) [issues](https://github.com/biomejs/biome/issues/3345) and limitations that Biome users reported.

`includes` accepts an array of glob patterns.
A glob pattern starting with a `!` is an exception.
This replaces `ignore` patterns and allows users to create chains of include and ignore patterns.
Thus, it is now possible to include again a file previously ignored.

> This was not possible with `include` and `ignore`, because `ignore` was always applied after `include`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was not possible with `include` and `ignore`, because `ignore` was always applied before `include`.
```

Do you think the suggestion is correct?

Author: No, it is the reverse. We first include files and then we ignore some of them. Another way to see things is `ignore` takes priority over `include`.

Reviewer: Yeah, that's what I knew it was, but the way it's phrased makes think otherwise. Can't you phrase it from the user's point of view instead of from the developer's point of view?

> `includes` handles `*` and `**/*` differently.
> The first pattern matches all files in the directory in which the Biome configuration file is.
> The second pattern matches all files.
> `include` and `ignore` interprets `*` as `**/*`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The semantics of `*` and `**/*` have changed too.

Before, with `include` and `ignore`, the glob `*`  was interpreted as `**/*`.

Now, with `includes`, the globs `*` and `**/*` are interpreted differently.
The first pattern matches all files that are inside a folder.
The second pattern recursively matches all files **and sub-folders** inside a folder.
```

Here's a suggestion of a pattern that I learnt:
1. describe the change
1. describe how it was
1. describe the new one

Doing so provides a better flow to the reader, so when the reader reads `3.`, the user has better context about the change and understands the new change.

Also, I removed the part of the "biome configuration", because it's not necessarily true, a glob like `src/*` doesn't have anything to do with the configuration.

Let's take a Biome configuration with `include`/`ignore` and convert it into the new `includes` field.

> In the following configuration, all files of the `test` directory and all files ending with the extension `.test.js` are ignored.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following configuration, all files of the `test` directory and all files ending with `.test.js` are ignored.
```

> The linter is only executed on files if the `src` directory that doesn't end with the `.gen.js` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The linter is only executed on files in the `src` directory, that don't end with the `.gen.js`.
```

> Also, an extra rule is enabled on files ending with the `.ts` extension.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, an extra lint rule is enabled on files ending with the `.ts` extension.
```

```json
{
    "files": {
        "ignore": ["*.test.js", "test"]
    },
    "linter": {
        "include": ["src/**"],
        "ignore": ["*.gen.js"],
        "enabled": true
    },
    "overrides": [{
        "include": ["*.ts"],
        "linter": { "rules": { "style": { "noDefaultExport": "on" } } }
    }]
}
```

The Biome configuration is migrated to the following one:

```json
{
    "files": {
        "includes": ["**", "!**/*.test.js", "!test"]
    },
    "linter": {
        "includes": ["src/**", "!**/*.gen.js"],
        "enabled": true
    },
    "overrides": [{
        "includes": ["**/*.ts"],
        "linter": { "rules": { "style": { "noDefaultExport": "on" } } }

>     }]

Reviewer: Shouldn't we explain the new globs, like, in relation to the bugs that were mentioned? For example, we should explain that `*.ts` was migrated to `**/*.ts`.

Author: I improved the example. Let me know if it is better. :)

}
```

Note that we have to add the glob pattern `**` to ensure that files got included.

> Otherwise, no files are included.

Reviewer: This is a bit out of context, because it doesn't connect the pattern `**`with the example we just described.

---

> "@biomejs/biome": major

Reviewer: This is a `minor`. Instead you should create a new changeset that mentions that `ignore` was removed (and list all the configuration fields removed) and `includes` should be used instead. Ideally, we should tell them to use `biome migrate`, and even tell them how an `ignore` value is translated in the new `includes` field.

Author: The changes are linked. Why should we have two distinct changesets? If we have two, how can I create a hyperlink to the other?

Reviewer: I see two options:
- a changeset that talks about of the **new** `includes` (minor), and one that talks about the **removed** `ignore` (major).
- a changeset (major) that talks about the removal of `include` and `ignore` in favour of `includes`. 

It seems that you're more keen to use the second option. If so, this changeset should be updated to highlight the fact that `ignore` (and later `include`) are removed, how they can be replaced, etc.

You can't link two changesets. Maybe we can link a possible migration guide for the website.
